.TH scribus "1" "Updated 2010-24-06"
.SH NAME
scribus - cross platform WYSIWYG desktop publishing app
.SH SYNOPSIS
scribus [-h|--help] [-v|--version] [-l|--lang language] [-la|--langs-available] [-f|--file|--] [filename] 
.SH DESCRIPTION
Scribus is an open source desktop publishing program. It provides true WYSIWYG editing, excellent PDF export facilities, and a wide range of other input and output options.

Please see the scribus documentation at
.I http://docs.scribus.net/
or the program's built in help for more comprehensive and up-to-date documentation.

This man page only provides summaries of some aspects of the program's use. It's main purpose is to make sure you can find the full documentation quickly and easily.
.SH OPTIONS
The definitive options are in the program's usage statement. Run:
.B scribus --help
to view the usage statement.

.TP
.B -l, --lang xx
Overrides the system locale and runs Scribus in language xx. The language is specified with the same POSIX language codes that are used in the LANG and LC_ALL environment variables. For example, English can be selected with 'en' (generic English), 'en_GB' (British English), 'en_US' (American english), etc. Similarly, Deutsch can be selected with 'de' or 'de_DE'.
.TP
.B -la, --langs-available
Print a list of languages for which user interface translations are available. To use that language run Scribus as 'scribus -l xx' where xx is the short language code, or set the locale environment variables as described below.
.TP
.B -v, --version
Prints the Scribus version number and exits.
.TP
.B -f, --file
Open the specified file. It's possible to simply pass the file name as an unqualified argument instead of using this, though if the name begins with a - you will need to use --, eg 'scribus -- -myfile.sla'.
.TP
.B -h, --help
Print a brief usage summary.
.TP
.B -fi, --font-info 
Shows the font file listing as Scribus starts. This can be used for diagnosing missing glyphs within fonts or possible broken font files.
.TP
.B -pi, --profile-info 
Shows the color profiles listing which Scribus can use. This can be used for diagnosing missing or broken color profiles.
.TP
.B -ns, --no-splash
Suppresses display of the splash screen during Scribus start-up.
.TP
.B -nns, --never-splash     
Stop the showing of the splashscreen on startup. Writes an empty file called .neversplash in ~/.scribus.
.TP
.B -sb, --swap-buttons
Use right to left dialog button ordering (eg. Cancel/No/Yes instead of Yes/No/Cancel)
.TP
.B -u, --upgradecheck
Downloads a file from our scribus server indicating latest available versions.

.SH ENVIRONMENT
Scribus respects the standard locale environment variables. Others may be used through underlying libraries, such as Qt, or by programs used by Scribus.
.I http://docs.scribus.net/
and the in-program documentation may note other environment variables used by Scribus or the programs and libraries it uses.
.TP
.B LC_ALL, LC_MESSAGES, LANG
POSIX locale. See
.I locale(1).
Scribus uses these three environment variables, in the listed order of precedence, to select the language (including the user interface translation) to use. If none are set, it will fall back on the locale set by the underlying Qt library.
.TP
.B PATH
Scribus may search the PATH for external tools if their paths are not specified absolutely. This is currently most likely to affect you if you have multiple copies of gs(1) installed. You can set an absolute path to the correct gs(1) in your Scribus preferences and bypass the
.B PATH
search.
.PP
A few important environment variables from other programs are summarised here for convenience, though you should check the original program's documentation if you are having trouble.
.TP
.B GS_FONTPATH
GhostScript font path. Affects the font search path for GhostScript, a component Scribus uses for some PostScript operations. Add new directories containing fonts to this colon-separated list to help GhostScript find fonts in non-standard locations. See gs(1) and the GhostScript HTML documentation for more information.
.TP
.B GS_LIB
GhostScript library path. GhostScript searches this path for Fontmap files. Like
.B GS_FONTPATH
it's a colon separated list of directories. You will usually want to use 
.B GS_FONTPATH
instead, though building a Fontmap file and using
.B GS_LIB
can speed things up if you have a
.I lot
of fonts. See gs(1) and the GhostScript HTML documentation for more information.
.SH FILES
.TP
.B $HOME/.scribus/
User preferences are stored in $HOME/.scribus/ on Unix or Linux . Most other paths are configurable from the Scribus preferences. Scribus 1.3 preferences are separate from Scribus 1.2.x User preferences for Mac OS X, OS/2 and Windows are documented in the help docs (F1) in Scribus.
.B $HOME/.scribus/scribus13.rc
Scribus preferences file - formatted in a custom xml schema. May eventually be retired in favour of new format prefs file.
.B $HOME/.scribus/prefs13.xml
Scribus 1.3.8 preferences are separate from Scribus 1.3.3.x
.TP
.B $HOME/.fonts/
.TP
.B $HOME/.fonts.conf
.TP
.B /etc/fonts
Fontconfig, the library used by Scribus to locate fonts, is normally configured with files in /etc/fonts, mainly /etc/fonts/fonts.conf and /etc/fonts/local.conf . It may also use a config file $HOME/.fonts.conf and fonts in $HOME/.fonts/ . See fonts.conf(5) and the fontconfig documentation for more information. Note that Scribus may also use its internal font path to locate more fonts - see the Preferences dialog and scribus help.
.SH SEE ALSO
The scribus documentation site http://docs.scribus.net/ and home page http://www.scribus.net/

gs(1), the gs html docs, and http://www.ghostscript.com/

.PP
The Qt library - http://www.trolltech.com/

fonts-conf(5) for info on configuring FontConfig
.SH RELATED SOFTWARE AND AFFILIATES

inkscape(1) - http://inkscape.org/

OpenClipArt - http://openclipart.org/

Fontmatrix - http://fontmatrix.net

Other affiliates may be listed in the footer on http://www.scribus.net/


.SH BUGS
See
.I
http://bugs.scribus.net/
for the Scribus on-line status tracker, which is used to track bug reports and feature requests.
.B If you intend to submit a bug report or feature request, please search the bug database first.
.SH AUTHORS
Please see the About Scribus option in the Help menu for a list of authors, translators, and contributors.
